In this symposium, we’ve been reminded
that Jehovah cherishes and empowers
those who serve him loyally.
In this concluding part of the symposium,
we’ll focus on single brothers and sisters.
Let’s answer three questions:
First, how do we know
that married and single Christians
all  have an honored place
in the congregation?
Second, how can we show
that we value and support
our fellow believers who are not married?
And third, if you’re single,
how can you be
a successful fighter for the faith?
To begin,
let’s briefly consider Jehovah’s view
of married and single Christians.
One thing we love
about our God is that Jehovah is not partial.
Regardless of a person’s
nationality or skin color,
anyone who wishes can serve him acceptably.
Jehovah’s impartiality also means
that he does not favor
married or single Christians,
one over the other.
Really, remaining single
or getting married is a personal choice.
And nowhere does the Bible
state that our value to Jehovah
is linked to being either single or married.
For example, at Matthew 19:12,
Jesus said that some of his followers
would choose to remain single
“on account of the Kingdom.”
He then went on to say:
“Let the one who can
make room for it make room for it.”
Now, think about that for a moment.
If a Christian, younger or older,
chooses to remain single
for the sake of the Kingdom,
Jehovah and Jesus respect such a decision
and they appreciate the good motive
behind that personal choice.
Other Christians are unmarried
because of circumstances in life.
For example, some faithful Christians
in the congregation are too young to marry.
Others have lost a mate
because of death or divorce.
The apostle Paul
maintained God’s impartial view
of both single and married Christians.
Like Jesus,
Paul did not teach that Christians
should marry or that they
should remain single.
In commenting on Paul’s
first inspired letter to the Corinthians,
The Watchtower  back in 2012 said this:
“Really, both [marriage and singleness]
“can be described as gifts from God.
Jehovah does not view
[singleness] as a cause for shame or grief.”
Singleness may bring
a Christian certain advantages.
An unmarried Christian who is not
weighed down with family responsibilities
may have more time and energy
to devote to God’s service
than a married Christian.
Of course, single Christians
do not view themselves
as better than married
Christians for this reason.
The Bible’s message
—Jehovah’s thinking—is clear, isn’t it?
Married and single Christians
all can have an honored
place in the congregation.
Now let’s consider our second question:
How can we who are married
show that we value
and support fellow believers
who are not married?
Please open your Bible
with me to 1 Corinthians chapter 12,
and notice verse 25.
In the context,
we notice that Paul is emphasizing
that in the Christian congregation,
we need one another.
We depend on one another.
Just as we need all
the parts of our literal body
—our eyes, our hands, and our feet—
all Christians, single and married,
are valued and needed.
So how can we show that we appreciate
our single brothers and sisters?
Let’s read verse 25:
“. . . so that there should be
no division in the body,”
and here’s the point,
“but its members should have
mutual concern for one another.”
The study edition of the New World
Translation  says that this expression,
“have mutual concern for one another,”
could also be rendered
as “be anxious over one another.”
Well, the lesson is clear:
Married Christians,
we show appreciation
for single brothers and sisters
when we show concern for their welfare,
whether that’s spiritually or physically.
We do not ignore them;
we don’t look down on them;
nor do we treat them as if we
have very little in common with them.
In this regard, the apostle Paul
set an example worthy of imitation.
He was keenly interested
in Timothy’s spiritual health and progress.
Though single,
Paul saw potential in Timothy
and invested in that spiritual man.
And what happened as a result?
An inexperienced, young, single Christian
became an excellent overseer.
And when the two of them, Paul and Timothy,
were no longer traveling together,
Paul continued to show
genuine interest in Timothy’s welfare.
We know that because he wrote two letters
that Jehovah has preserved
for our benefit in the Holy Scriptures.
Now, can you imagine
how Timothy must have felt
to have received a letter
from his older friend Paul?
For just a moment,
let’s put ourselves in Timothy’s sandals
as we listen to just a few lines
from Paul’s first letter.
“To Timothy, a genuine child in the faith:
“May you have undeserved kindness
and mercy and peace
from God the Father
and Christ Jesus our Lord.”
A little later in the letter,
Timothy would have read this:
“This instruction I entrust to you,
my child Timothy,
“in harmony with the prophecies
that were made about you,
that by these you may
go on waging the fine warfare.”
Then there was this encouragement:
“Do not neglect the gift in you
“that was given you through a prophecy
when the body of elders
laid their hands on you.”
Do you think those
words of encouragement reassured Timothy
and made him feel appreciated?
Without a doubt.
In the same letter,
Paul went on to express concern
about Timothy’s “frequent cases of sickness.”
Paul’s concern for Timothy’s welfare,
his spiritual and physical welfare,
no doubt touched
Timothy’s heart and encouraged him
to move forward in Jehovah’s service.
And Paul’s example touches our heart as well.
We may be moved to ask ourselves:
‘Is there more I can do
‘to look out for the needs of single ones
‘who are exerting
themselves in God’s service?
‘Do I wrongly view single ones as incomplete,
‘inferior, or lacking,
or do I show them honor?’
As a traveling overseer,
Timothy was a success.
Paul did not look down on him.
Rather, Paul chose Timothy,
a single Christian,
for weighty assignments
and gave him the training he needed
in order to succeed.
Today, I’m sure you
and I can think of many practical ways
that we can demonstrate
our concern for the welfare
of our fellow believers who are unmarried.
The August 2020 issue of The Watchtower
provided this reminder in a study article:
“We do well to keep in mind
“that some single Christians have made it
a personal goal to remain unmarried.
“Other . . . Christians would like to marry,
“but they simply
have not found the right person.
“Still others may
have lost their mate in death.
“In any case,
should those in the congregation
“feel the need to ask
single Christians why they are not married
or to offer [help to] find a mate?”
When we reason on Jehovah’s thinking
as found in the Scriptures,
we know the answer to that question.
We do not  need to ask single ones
when they are getting married;
nor do we need to pair them up
with other single ones
if they have not requested our help.
Instead, we should look for ways
to commend them
for their fine example and assure them
that we love and appreciate them.
In the following dramatization,
please note what an elder learned
about the challenges faced by single ones.
Brothers, it’s hard to believe
this is our last time together.
Wow!
We have a packed agenda,
so let’s get started.
Our first point . . .
This is our last week
with our circuit overseer
before he leaves us
for his new circuit assignment.
Rick has been a great circuit overseer
—spiritually mature, experienced,
and patient with us.
Tom, your thought?
Well, the brothers and sisters . . .
Rick is single.
And sadly, there were plenty of times
we turned that gift into a challenge
—ever since his first visit.
Hello, Jeff.
Yeah, I have a minute.
Oh, that.
Laundry night.
My washing machine is a clunker.
I just assumed a single brother
had lots of free time.
I didn’t know how much he had to do
on his own.
But there was a lot more I didn’t understand.
See you. Bye!
Bye.
Hey, look!
They have something there.
It sounds like a great Bible study.
I can’t wait to meet her.
Thank you very much.
See you then.
See you.
They would be really good . . .
I don’t know what you’re waiting for.
For what?
Come on!
A single circuit overseer, a pioneer sister
—you’ve got to be looking for a C.O.’s wife.
Well, . . .
The teasing was so inappropriate
and was there at every visit.
Then there were those trying to be,
how should I say, helpful.
Look!
You’ll want to meet them,
and so I invited them for lunch Saturday.
Rick never asked for that help.
All it did was put him
and plenty of sisters
in an awkward situation.
That’s what he dealt with week after week.
We all failed at times
to see past the single person
to the spiritual man giving Jehovah his best.
We’ll miss you.
Just maybe not as much
as some of the sisters.
I didn’t want to make that mistake again
with any single brother or sister.
Rick.
Jeff.
Thank you.
I learned a lot from you.
And I hope Jehovah blesses you
wherever you go.
Amen!
Thanks, Rick.
Let’s now consider our final point:
If you’re single,
you too can be powerful by faith.
But how?
A great help in building faith
is by setting and reaching spiritual goals.
Of Abraham, Romans 4:20 says:
“Because of the promise of God,
he did not waver in a lack of faith.”
Like Abraham, we encourage you
single brothers and sisters
to frequently meditate on God’s promises.
Thinking often about how Jehovah
has kept every promise to us in the past
and how he’s keeping his promises now
surely encourages us to remember
that he will keep every promise
that he has made for our future.
Doing so strengthens our faith.
Like Jesus, like Paul, like Timothy,
talk about Jehovah’s promises with others
by zealously sharing in the field ministry.
And, please, do not isolate yourself
from others in the congregation,
thinking that you have
very little to contribute.
No, you have much to contribute
as a faithful brother or sister
in the Christian congregation.
We warmly encourage you to reach out
and associate with spiritually mature ones
in your congregation,
whether single or married.
Like Timothy, “ponder over these things;
“be absorbed in [spiritual pursuits],
so that your advancement
may be plainly [manifest to] all.”
Remember, you are needed and loved.
Well, what have all of us
learned in this faith-strengthening
and encouraging symposium?
Please open your Bible
with me to Hebrews chapter 11.
Starting in verse 4, you’ll notice,
as you scan the verses,
that many familiar names of men
and women of faith are outlined for us.
There’s Abel and Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Sarah,
Rahab, Gideon, and David, and many more.
All of these men and women
had different circumstances in life.
It’s true.
But what did they all have in common?
Notice Hebrews 11:34.
In the middle of the verse, it tells us
they “were made powerful.”
Yes, they “were made powerful” by faith.
And the same is happening today
in every congregation
of Jehovah’s people earth wide.
Young ones, older ones, men and women
—regardless of our family circumstances—
all of us are being made powerful by faith.
So, dear brothers and sisters,
please be assured that we love you
and appreciate you.
And may Jehovah bless your efforts
to be a successful fighter for the faith.